Hello everyone and welcome to the principal component analysis lecture if you want a more mathematical
background and a deeper dive into principle component analysis.
Go ahead and read Section ten point two of an introduction to statistical learning.
Now let's discuss the basic idea behind principle component analysis or PCA.
PCa is an unsupervised school technique used to examine the interrelations among a set of variables
in order to identify the underlying structure of those variables.
It is also known sometimes as a general factor analysis where regression determines a line of best fit
to a data set.
Factor Analysis determines several orthogonal lines of best fit to the data set orthogonal just means
at right angles.
Actually those lines are perpendicular to each other.
In the end dimensional space where the end dimensional space is the variable sample space.
There are as many dimensions as there are variables.
So in a dataset with four variables the sample space for them in Shanel Let's go ahead and see an example.
Here we have some data plotted along to features X and Y and we want to head and put a regression line
of best fit what we can do now is add an orthogonal line which is just at a right angle to that first
line.
And now we can begin to understand the components of our dataset components are a linear transformation
that chooses a variable system for the data set such that the greatest variance of the data set comes
to lie on the first axes and then likewise the second greatest variance on the second axes and so on.
And this process allows us to reduce the number of variables used in an analysis and if we look back
on our figure we can see that that first principle line explains the 70 percent of the variation and
the line orthogonal to that explains 28 percent of the variation.
And right now we have 2 percent of the variation remaining unexplained and note that the components
are uncorrelated.
Since in the sample space they are orthogonal to each other or at direkte right angles.
And we can continue this analysis into higher dimensions.
Here we now have three components component one that principal component explaining most of the variance
and then component to component 3 and a higher mention.
As we go into the z axes if we use this technique on a dataset with a large number of variables we can
actually compress the amount of explained variation to just a few components.
However the most challenging part of PCa is interpreting the components.
All right so that's the theory on principal component analysis or PCA for the rest of this section of
the course.
We're going to walk through the documentation example and then after that goes straight into a project
with exercises the project will involve using PCA to take in a cancer data set on tumors with 30 features
and reducing it to a dataset with only four principal components.
OK let's get started.
I'll see you in the next lecture.